Have you ever stood on the ocean shore,
enjoying the salt spray,
watching the breakers dash against the rocks
or run up onto the sandy beach
then withdraw?
Many enjoy spending hours at the ocean.
We never stop marveling
at its beauty and its immense size.
On the other hand, many fear
the destructive power of the ocean.
Like other natural forces,
the ocean can act like a powerful giant
that sometimes goes on a rampage.
What can man do to stop
the wall of water of a tsunami
from approaching the coastline?
The power of storm waves
is almost unbelievable.
They have been known to throw
boulders weighing 7,000 pounds
over a wall 20 feet high.
Can we trust that Jehovah in the future
will bring the oceans
and other natural forces
into perfect balance?
In the following video, note how the oceans
give loud and clear evidence
of Jehovah’s wisdom and power.
Millions of cubic meters of water
circulate continually around our planet.
Near the poles, water that is colder,
saltier, and denser sinks,
creating a flow almost 100 times
that of the Amazon River.
This drives a massive circulation of water
that may take 1,000 years to complete
—the global ocean conveyor belt.
This enormous system distributes heat,
which helps to stabilize the weather
and transport great quantities
of nutrients around the world
so that life
may flourish in abundance.
Jehovah set these mechanisms in motion
and understands them perfectly.
“You rule over the raging of the sea;
when its waves surge, you calm them.”
As we saw in our video,
the oceans are essential
to sustain life on the earth.
Sadly, however, greedy men
have trashed them with pollution.
Global warming has caused
ocean levels to rise,
threatening coastal areas.
Experts are concerned that the natural forces
are so out of balance
that soon the planet
will no longer sustain life.
Yet, friends, if Jehovah had
the wisdom and power
to create the earth’s oceans,
when his time comes to bring
all natural forces back into perfect balance,
he can certainly cause us
to live in harmony with them.
Though the oceans might appear
to be uncontrollable,
we know that Jehovah is vastly more powerful.
Note how Psalm 93:4 describes his power,
Psalm 93:4:
“Above the sound of many waters,
“mightier than the breaking waves of the sea,
Jehovah is majestic in the heights.”
Yes, the great sea may lift up
its powerful waves to heaven,
but it is no match for our majestic,
Almighty God.
Jehovah’s powerful ability
to perfectly control the oceans
gives us great confidence
that he is also perfectly capable
of protecting us, his people.
In Jeremiah 5:22, notice how Jehovah
reminds his people of his power.
Jeremiah 5:22:
“‘Do you not fear me?’ declares Jehovah,
“‘Should you not tremble before me?
“‘It is I who placed the sand
“‘as the boundary for the sea,
“‘a permanent regulation
that it cannot pass over.
“‘Although its waves toss,
they cannot prevail;
although they roar,
they still cannot pass beyond it.’”
Yes, Almighty God placed the sand
as the boundary for the sea.
So when its furious waves pound against sand,
the sand absorbs their impact
and the force vanishes.
Since Jehovah controls
the literal roaring sea
from going beyond its boundaries,
can he not also protect his people
when the wicked sea of humanity threatens us
with its violent storms?
Jehovah’s control over vast waters
was well demonstrated
when he protected the Israelites
by allowing them to cross
the Red Sea on dry land.
Now, the Red Sea has an average depth
of over 1,600 feet.
It is estimated that at the point
where the Israelites crossed it,
the depth of the sea was as much as 50 feet.
Imagine being an Israelite
walking through this corridor
with walls of water on each side of you
some 50 feet high.
And then Jehovah used
those same walls of water to collapse,
drowning their enemies, the Egyptians.
Yes, Jehovah controlled those vast waters
to deliver an entire nation
from a world power.
And do you recall the account
in Mark 4:37-39
when God empowered his Son, Jesus,
to control the sea and the wind?
When Jesus and the disciples
were crossing the Sea of Galilee in a boat,
a great windstorm caused the sea to rage,
and it threatened to fill up their boat.
What did Jesus do?
He commanded the wind and the sea
with the words, “Hush!
Be quiet!”
And the raging wind and sea calmed down.
So on this occasion, Jesus showed
what he will do
as King of God’s Kingdom
during the millennium.
He will control forces of nature.
There will be no need to fear the ocean.
In recent years, disastrous storms
are becoming more frequent and severe.
What used to be considered extreme
—massive floods, killer droughts,
and monster snow storms—
is the new normal.
Many experts now put the blame
on human activity
that has affected the oceans and the climate.
So, yes, men continue to ruin
the earth today.
But here’s the good news.
During the millennium,
by means of his Kingdom,
our wise Creator will undo
all the damage done by humans.
Everything will function in harmony
with Jehovah’s principles,
and we will learn how to properly care
for this beautiful planet.
And as we do, everything will be brought back
into proper balance,
including the climate and the oceans.
While some men today fear that the earth
will be destroyed because of man’s abuse,
Jehovah gives us this comforting promise
at Psalm 104:5,
Psalm 104:5:
“He has established the earth
on its foundations;
“it will not be moved from its place
forever and ever.”
Yes, the beautiful, deep, and dark blue ocean
will roll on forever.
The Creator will make sure of that.
By our observing the oceans
and meditating on what we see,
we can build our faith that soon
we will enjoy Jehovah’s creation
forever without fear.
Brother James Mantz,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“Use Creation to Build Your Faith—Forests.”